---
title: 'Unconcious Biases and Identitiy Crisis'
date: 2025-10-14
permalink: /posts/2012/08/blog-post-4/
tags:
  - cultural exploration
  - Individual Identity
  - Social Profile
---

This is my first personal post and I don't expect it to turn out great. I have strong opinions, and I like to defend them and prove they are the definitive answers, but now as I have my website, it might help to disclose some of them and discuss with folks and see what's out there.

I have thought about identity crisis and unconcious biases for quite a while after I left China, where pretty much I was pretty successful maintaining my profile and considered as the good kid, or the one everyone might want to become. But as everybody can guess things shifted quite a bit after I went to the US and my beliefs were defintely shaken.

Here, there's cool and uncool folks, there's a word called "nerd". (Don't get me wrong, I just point out the inner voice of many. And I hold no such definitions) Working hard excessively for something you don't necessarily like, or being intelligent at something is being "criticized" or discriminated. I never quite get why this happened especially considering that the US is the tech hub, and American global position heavily depends on that. 

But later, I started to realize that people here, formed their neurons differently than I did, note my words here. Yes, this is quite serious and is some way to put it. We cannot assume that something different is just about perspectives, or individual traits. Our neurons have memory, the child self forms survival tactics to survive the surrounding environment, most of the time without us even noticing. And this is where a lot of the preconceptions kick in. A Chinese mind is likely going to think that studying is the "right" way, an American mind on the other hand, likely thinks that social mingling is something important. We are all pushed to perceive life in a certain way by our environment, and we learn quickly, much much more quickly than how we unlearn them. And this is a solid identity formation, and it is quite stubborn.

While the identity helps us go through thicks and thins, which in return strengthens our beliefs even further, it hinders us to see other people with a calm and objective lense and sometimes puts us in trouble we find very hard to escape. 

Let's talk about the bias first. Biases root so strongly during the formation of our identity, neurons, because of the hardwired,pre-defined, habitual ways our brains associate things. I now even believe it is something that hinders the togetherness of the world itself. A classic example would be cultural misunderstanding and its much deeper reflection in politics, geopolitics, and social interactions. The world in practice is fragmennted. It is not because people cannot inherently live together and understand each other, it is really because the hardwired logic doesn't want to change, even in the case when changing a bit would be significantly beneficial. Take Chinese culture and American culture for example again, we can clearly see that focusing on individuality for a little while helps Chinese to be more balanced in the long term, more expressive, better at striving for rights, while focusing on collective identity, being less self centered, allows individualistic minds to walk out of the bubbles and see the bigger picture. But the sad truth is, neither is willing to shift, and from individual to nations, no one has the ability to rewrite the hardwired logic we have formed, and we use that to create conflicts within ourselves, where 1+1 >> 2.